12 years ago I awoke from a routine pelvic floor repair with excruciating left sided vaginal pain. At the time I worked as a staff nurse on a gynaecology unit and so I reassured myself that this was normal. I continued to have the same sort of pain, as well as tingling, burning and sometimes numb sensations in my perineum and vulva but these occurred intermittently. This went on for the next 8 years and were brought on by certain activities such as cycling, aerobic exercise, sexual intercourse and the wearing of tight underwear. I was an avid cyclist as well as a gym fanatic, so I ignored my symptoms, especially as visits to my GP were fruitless as to the cause because everything ‘looked normal’ and swabs etc always came back negative.

Unfortunately about 4 ½ years ago my symptoms became much worse and were no longer intermittent. At their worst I was unable to sit without severe stabbing and burning pain and had to abandon wearing my beloved jeans, theses were replaced by skirts, underwear two sizes too big and tights with holes cut in the gusset due to the relentless burning sensation. I can only describe it as feeling like I had just given birth accompanied by feeling like I had something lodged in my vagina and, as if that wasn’t bad enough, the sensation of having hot oil poured on both buttocks. I saw a doctor at my local pain clinic who told me it was’ idiopathic nerve pain’ and that I may have it for the rest of my life. I was devastated. Fortunately I saw a different doctor who decided against doing the caudal nerve block that the first doctor had ordered, opting instead to perform a pudendal block after taking the time to discuss my symptoms prior to the procedure. I’m so thankful that he made that decision as I had complete resolution of my symptoms for two weeks. It was wonderful, and I almost forgot that I’d ever had the pain.

Sadly my symptoms returned. I was given the diagnosis of pudendal neuralgia in a five minute phone call from the original doctor I’d seen. When I asked what it was and how could I help myself the reply was blunt; “there’s nothing you can do, just go out and buy a coccyx cushion. We’ll get you in for another block”. Before I had chance to respond the phone was put down on me.

And so my internet search began. I read Information Standard certified information about pudendal neuralgia. Upon learning how rarely it is diagnosed I was also relieved that at last I was able to talk to other patients who understood just what I was going through. I could ask questions and find out who the experts were in dealing with this complex and frightening diagnosis. The very best piece of advice I was given was from a fellow sufferer. She said “have a plan, you can’t do nothing, just have a plan”. So that’s exactly what I did. I was determined to seek the best outcome possible. I couldn’t bear the prospect of living with the tortuous and embarrassing pain for potentially years.

Through the Pelvic Pain Support Network I found a specialist women’s health physio who was knowledgeable about PN and was proficient in manual therapy. So, with the help of my best friend we made the 3 hour round trip each week. It was worth every penny (finding NHS physio for PN remains frustratingly limited) and after some months my pain reduced from 7 out of 10 to a 3. This was through internal trigger point therapy and also the fact that she was an expert and I was able to share my fears and frustration. Sadly the second nerve block caused severe pain in my left buttock and after struggling to hold down my job I was forced to go off sick. I had hit a wall both physically and mentally. The physio had helped my symptoms but 8 months on, the pain remained. Now that I was unable to work I couldn’t afford it any longer.

So what next? Well I went to see two UK based specialists. The first one who I saw as an NHS referral despite being out of my area, told me I should go to Nantes (France) “where the experts are” but that the decompression surgery to release the pudendal nerve (he felt my symptoms were evidence that I was entrapped in the ligaments of my pelvis) would not remove the pain completely. I would have it “for life”. Disheartened I returned home to my children. I’m a single Mum with a mortgage and all of my three children pleaded with me “Go to France, you can’t do nothing Mum. The second specialist I saw asked me if I’d ever been sexually abused? I assume this was because my GP had written my mental health diagnosis in my referral. When I told him I hadn’t he said “well I think you have”. At this point I was so low that I was beyond caring. I cried whilst he did a third pudendal nerve block (ultrasound guided), and was told he felt I had “chronic pain that just happened to be in the pelvis”. I was told to increase my pregabalin and practice mindfulness. Oh, and again, after asking if I would ever be free of it was told yet again “people can live very fulfilled lives with this type of pain”. My friend and I began the 5 hour drive home with me weeping silent tears. It was beyond me how I could live a fulfilled life with burning, stabbing vulval and buttock pain every day for the rest of my life. Fortunately the consultant did agree to arrange a CT guided nerve block as this would be definitive.

I had tried everything to help myself, read many self help books, including ‘explain pain’ by Lorimer Mosely, downloaded and listened to countless self hypnosis and relaxation recordings, acupuncture, massage, TENS, special cushions, mindfulness, but essentially I knew deep down that the nerve was compressed. My symptoms had started to spread to the right side and I developed piriformis syndrome in both buttocks, a response to the nerve irritation. My personal life suffered immensely, I was unable to do things with my children, even cooking a meal was a struggle as standing for any length of time became intolerable. I was only able to drive short distances so much loved trips into the countryside became a thing of the past.

Whilst researching pudendal neuralgia I had read the team in Nantes, who pioneered the decompression surgery many years ago. I spoke to two women who had had the surgery there and having talked to them and read up on outcomes I knew what I needed to do. The CT guided block relieved my pain for several hours and so proved as much as is possible that I did have pudendal nerve entrapment.

At this point in my story I want to introduce my mad French friend. He had witnessed my struggle to get anywhere and this is where I know how truly blessed I am. One day he rang me and asked what was being done? I was unable to tell him as I burst into tears. I had spent a small fortune seeing these specialists privately and was surviving on sick pay. “But you must go to France” he said. As soon as I mentioned money he jumped in and insisted he would take care of it. At that point my fortunes changed. He and his girlfriend drove me to France (me laid down in the back of the car due to pain, listening to one of a huge selection of relaxation recordings (after all, the pain was also in my brain, I wanted to switch off my stress response, not easy under the circumstances)!

We sat in the hospital in front of one of the doctors I’d read about and was told “yes it is true, you do have PN and you need surgery”. After this news we sat in a cafe across the road and I burst into tears. My friend said “stop being silly, do you want to go through the rest of your life without meeting anyone/ without sex?” My response was to tell him I didn’t care if I never met a man again (because let’s face it, sex, when I had last had it, caused the most horrendous genital pain for weeks after. No sex ever sounded like heaven to me. Just as well I was single).

Three months later I managed to get funding from the NHS for surgery in Nantes. I was so unsure of my decision but again, my friend’s insistence and also a visit to another physio, confirmed my fear that the French doctors were right. This convinced me to go. My friend and his girlfriend drove me to France again. I had bilateral decompression surgery. My left pudendal nerve was badly damaged, the right side was less so, but both were entrapped in the ligaments. The surgeon reassured me I would make a full recovery and that this awful chapter in my life was over. I am happy to say I have improved hugely. The vulval pain is mostly gone and I can wear my beloved jeans again. I had 8 months off work, then returned. I work part time and meditate every day (I did the mindfulness for health course after the surgery, this time it helped enormously).

Best of all my eldest daughter engineered a blind date with her friends Dad who is also a single parent. I was reticent to say the least but now, a few years on, I am the happiest I’ve been in a long time, able to do more each day, have a future to look forward to, oh, and I can enjoy sex without pain = miracle, and have also remarried!

So I’d like to conclude by saying I’ve learned so much from this, my stress response is firmly switched off. Without the Pelvic Pain Support Network to provide support, information, advocacy, guidance and friendship I don’t think I would be here now. I’m so grateful to them and also glad to be in a position to be able to provide support to others after having been so supported myself.
